# Compile and Run your First Java Program

> In this section you will get the step by step guide to write, compile and Run your first Java program.
<br> <br>Let’s start with a simple java 'Hello World' program.


```Java
public class MyFirstJavaProgram {
  public static void main(String[] args){
    System.out.println("This is my first program in java");
  }//End of main
}//End of MyFirstJavaProgram Class
```

#### Output: 
> This is my first program in java

## How to compile and run your first java program

> <b>Prerequisite:</b> <i>You need to have java installed on your system.</i>

> <b> Step 1: </b> Open a text editor, like Notepad on windows. Copy the above program and paste it in the text editor.
><br> <b> Step 2: </b> Save the file as MyFirstJavaProgram.java.
><br> <b> Step 3: </b> In this step, we will compile the program. For this, open command prompt (cmd) on Windows, if you are Mac OS then open Terminal.
<br> <br>To compile the program, type the following command and hit enter.



```Java
javac MyFirstJavaProgram.java
```

><br> <b> Step 4: </b> After compilation the .java file gets translated into the .class file(byte code). Now we can run the program. 
<br> <br> To run the program, type the following command and hit enter:


```Java
java MyFirstJavaProgram
```

## First Java Program Explained

### public class MyFirstJavaProgram

> Every line of code that runs in Java must be inside a class. In our example, we named the class MyFirstJavaProgram. A class should always start with an uppercase first letter.
<br> <br> <b> Note: </b> <i> Java is case-sensitive: "MyClass" and "myclass" has different meaning.</i>
<br><br> The name of the java file must match the class name. When saving the file, save it using the class name and add ".java" to the end of the filename

### The main Method

> The main() method is the entry point of the java program and you will see it in every Java program:

> <b>public: </b> This makes the main method public that means that we can call the method from outside the class.

> <b>static:</b> We do not need to create object for static methods to run. They can run itself.

> <b>void:</b> It does not return anything.

> <b>main:</b> It is the method name. This is the entry point method from which the JVM can run your program.

> <b>(String[] args): </b>Used for command line arguments that are passed as strings. We will cover that in a separate post.

### System.out.println()

> This method prints the string inside the double quotes on the console and inserts a newline after.


```Java

```
