# Introduction to Java Programming

### **SETTING UP JAVA IDE:** 
Follow link to setup IntelliJ:
https://github.com/Tech-i-s/techis-java/blob/master/01.%20Java%20Introduction/2.%20Setting%20Up%20for%20First%20Program.md

## **Introduction to Java**

> JAVA was developed by Sun Microsystems Inc in 1991, later acquired by Oracle Corporation. It was developed by James Gosling and Patrick Naughton.
<br> Java is a simple programming language. Compling, Running and Debugging is easy in Java.
<br>
<br>Java is used for:
<br><ul>
    <li>Desktop Application</li>
    <li>Web applications</li>
    <li>Database connection</li>
    <li>Mobile applications</li>
    <li>Web servers and application servers</li>
    <li>And many more!</li>
</ul>


## Features of JAVA

### Platform Independent

> Java Compiler(javac) converts source code (.java file) to the byte code(.class file). JVM executes the bytecode produced by compiler. This byte code can run on any platform such as Windows, Linux, Mac OS etc. Which means a program that is compiled on windows can run on Linux and vice-versa. Each operating system has different JVM, however the output they produce after execution of bytecode is same across all operating systems. That is why we call java as platform independent language.

### Object Oriented language

>Object oriented programming is a way of organizing programs as collection of objects, each of which represents an instance of a class.
<br>4 main concepts of Object Oriented programming are:
<br><ol>
    <li>Abstraction</li>
    <li>Encapsulation</li>
    <li>Inheritance</li>
    <li>Polymorphism</li>
</ol>

> We will look into these concepts in more details later in this tutorial.


### Simple
> Java is considered as one of simple language because it does not have complex features like Operator overloading, Multiple inheritance, pointers and Explicit memory allocation.

### Robust Language
> Robust means reliable. Java programming language is developed in a way that puts a lot of emphasis on early checking for possible errors, that’s why java compiler is able to detect errors that are not easy to detect in other programming languages. The main features of java that makes it robust are garbage collection, Exception Handling and memory allocation.

### Secure
> We don’t have pointers and we cannot access out of bound arrays (you get ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException if you try to do so) in java. That’s why several security flaws like stack corruption or buffer overflow is impossible to exploit in Java.

### Java is distributed
> Using java programming language we can create distributed applications. RMI(Remote Method Invocation) and EJB(Enterprise Java Beans) are used for creating distributed applications in java. In simple words: The java programs can be distributed on more than one systems that are connected to each other using internet connection. Objects on one JVM (java virtual machine) can execute procedures on a remote JVM.

### Multithreading
> Java supports multithreading. Multithreading is a Java feature that allows concurrent execution of two or more parts of a program for maximum utilisation of CPU.

### Portable
> As discussed above, java code that is written on one machine can run on another machine. The platform independent byte code can be carried to any platform for execution that makes java code portable.
