# Data Types in Java

> Data type defines the values that a variable can take, for example if a variable has int data type, it can only take integer values. 
<br> <br>In java we have two categories of data type: 
><ol>
    <li>Primitive data types </li>
    <li>Non-primitive data types </li>
</ol> 

### Primitive data types

> In Java, we have eight primitive data types: boolean, char, byte, short, int, long, float and double. Java developers included these data types to maintain the portability of java as the size of these primitive data types do not change from one operating system to another.

<br> <table style="width:50%" 
            align="left"
            border="1">
    <tr align= "left">
        <th style="width:20%">Data Type</th>
        <th>Size</th>
        <th style="width:60%">Description</th>
    </tr>
    <tr align= "left">
        <td align= "left">byte</td>
        <td align= "centre">1 byte</td>
        <td align= "centre">Stores whole numbers from -128 to 127</td>
    </tr>
    <tr align= "left">
        <td>short</td>
        <td>2 bytes</td>
        <td>Stores whole numbers from -32,768 to 32,767</td>
    </tr>
    <tr align= "left">
        <td>int</td>
        <td>4 bytes</td>
        <td>Stores whole numbers from -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>long</td>
        <td>8 bytes</td>
        <td>Stores whole numbers from -9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>float</td>
        <td>4 bytes</td>
        <td>Stores fractional numbers. Sufficient for storing 6 to 7 decimal digits</td>
    </tr>
    <tr align= "left">
        <td>double</td>
        <td>8 bytes</td>
        <td>Stores fractional numbers. Sufficient for storing 15 decimal digits</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>boolean</td>
        <td>1 bit</td>
        <td>Stores true or false values</td>
    </tr>
    <tr align= "left">
        <td>char</td>
        <td>2 bytes</td>
        <td>Stores a single character/letter or ASCII values</td>
    </tr>
    
</table>

### Numbers
>Primitive number types are divided into two groups:
<br> <br><b>Integer types</b> stores whole numbers, positive or negative (such as 123 or -456), without decimals. Valid types are byte, short, int and long. Which type you should use, depends on the numeric value.
<br> <br><b>Floating point</b> types represents numbers with a fractional part, containing one or more decimals. There are two types: float and double.

#### Integer Types

###### Byte
> The byte data type can store whole numbers from -128 to 127. This can be used instead of int or other integer types to save memory when you are certain that the value will be within -128 and 127:

<b> Example: <b>


```Java
byte myNum = 100;
System.out.println(myNum);
```

    100





    null



###### Short
> The short data type can store whole numbers from -32768 to 32767:

<b> Example: <b>


```Java
short myNum = 5000;
System.out.println(myNum);
```

    5000





    null



###### Int
> The int data type can store whole numbers from -2147483648 to 2147483647. In general, and in our tutorial, the int data type is the preferred data type when we create variables with a numeric value.

<b> Example: <b>


```Java
int myNum = 100000;
System.out.println(myNum);
```

    100000





    null



###### Long
> The long data type can store whole numbers from -9223372036854775808 to 9223372036854775807. This is used when int is not large enough to store the value. Note that you should end the value with an "L":

<b> Example: <b>


```Java
long myNum = 15000000000L;
System.out.println(myNum);
```

    15000000000





    null



#### Floating Point Types

>You should use a floating point type whenever you need a number with a decimal, such as 9.99 or 3.14515.
<br>The float and double data types can store fractional numbers.
<br><i>Note: You should end the value with an "f" for floats and "d" for doubles:

<b> Float Example : <b>


```Java
float myNum = 5.75f;
System.out.println(myNum);
```

    5.75





    null



<b> Double Example : <b>


```Java
double myNum = 19.99d;
System.out.println(myNum);
```

    19.99





    null



### Boolean Types
> A boolean data type is declared with the boolean keyword and can only take the values true or false: <br>

<b> Example : </b>


```Java
boolean isJavaFun = true;
boolean isFishTasty = false;
System.out.println(isJavaFun);     
System.out.println(isFishTasty);
```

    true
    false





    null



### Characters
> The char data type is used to store a single character. The character must be surrounded by single quotes, like 'A' or 'c' <br>

<b> Example : </b>


```Java
char myGrade = 'B';
System.out.println(myGrade);
```

    B





    null



> Alternatively, if you are familiar with ASCII values, you can use those to display certain characters:

<b> Example : </b>


```Java
char myVar1 = 65, myVar2 = 66, myVar3 = 67;
System.out.println(myVar1);
System.out.println(myVar2);
System.out.println(myVar3);
```

    A
    B
    C





    null



### Strings
> The String data type is used to store a sequence of characters (text). String values must be surrounded by double quotes: <br>

<b> Example : </b>


```Java
String greeting = "Hello World";
System.out.println(greeting);
```

    Hello World





    null



### Non-Primitive Data Types

> Non-primitive data types are called reference types because they refer to objects.
<br>The main difference between primitive and non-primitive data types are:
<br><ul>
    <li>Primitive types are predefined (already defined) in Java. Non-primitive types are created by the programmer and is not defined by Java (except for String).</li>
    <li>Non-primitive types can be used to call methods to perform certain operations, while primitive types cannot.</li>
    <li>A primitive type has always a value, while non-primitive types can be null.</li>
    <li>A primitive type starts with a lowercase letter, while non-primitive types starts with an uppercase letter.</li>
    <li>The size of a primitive type depends on the data type, while non-primitive types have all the same size.</li>
    <li>Examples of non-primitive types are Strings, Arrays, Classes, Interface, etc.</li>
</ul>








```Java

```
